Assignment 4
Mini Project 2 option: Modelling phase
transitions
The aims of this exercise is to implement lattice spin models and obtain some of their properties
using Metropolis Monte Carlo.
Tasks

1. Write code to implements the classical nearest neighbour 2D Ising model on a L × L site
square lattice, using periodic boundary conditions. Defined the for a coupling constant J
and set the external magnetic field, H , to be 0.

2. Code up Metropolis sampling for your lattice, using a parallel set of walkers to independently
sample the Ising model at a given temperature.

3. Setting J = 1 (the ferromagnetic model) simulate the Ising model for a range of temperatures and obtaining plot of quantities such as the average energy per site and the specific
as a function of temperature between 1.0 and 3.0 kB T /J .

4. Implement the nearest-neighbour 2D XY hamiltonian, which is a set of vector spins on
a square lattice that can rotate in the plane of the lattice. In this model the energy for the
coupling between adjacent spin pairs is J cos(θij ) where θ is the difference in angle between
their two directions (i.e. θi − θj ). This replaces the Jsi sj energy term the Ising model. Again
calculate the specific heat capacity, but also the spin-correlation (average of the angles) as
a function of the fractional length of the lattice as a function of temperature between 0.5
and 1.5 kB T /J .

5. Decide, based on simulating a range of lattice sizes (L = 16, 32, 64, ...) for the models in
tasks 3 and 4, whether phase transitions are occurring as a function of temperature for
these models, presenting evidence for your conclusions in the report.
PH510

2026

(1 / 2)

Marking prompt
Match requirement of tasks
Suitable licensing of developed code
Pylint score × 2
Presented graphs of simulation data for the Ising and XY
models
Parallelism (with evidence) of the developed code
Correct conclusions, with evidence, for the behaviour of
the Ising and
the XY models
Total

Mark contribution
15
5
20
20
20
10
10
100

Submission
The code (or even better, its location in an open repository), plus a maximum of 1 page of text
(plus any figures or tables of data), MyPlace by the 15th of April.

Hints
• Calculate thermal energy in units of J , where you can set J = 1.
• Second-order phase transitions show a divergence in fluctuation related properties like the
constant volume heat capacity, Cv , as the system gets larger.
• The Python modulo operation, a % b, can be useful to find sites inside of the lattice, by
wrapping around the integer a to fall within the specified range [0, b − 1].

PH510

2026

(2 / 2)

